doc: specs (#116)
celestiaorg/go-header: p2p/p2p.md

# P2P

> The p2p package mainly contains two services:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The P2P package mainly contains two services:
```

Reviewer: same through out, P2P should be capitalized.

1) Subscriber
2) Exchange

## Subscriber

> Subscriber is a service that manages gossip of headers among the nodes in the p2p network by using [libp2p][libp2p] and its [pubsub][pubsub] modules. The pubsub topic used for gossip (`/<networkID>/header-sub/v0.0.1`) is configurable based on `networkID` parameter used to initialize the subscriber service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Subscriber is a service that manages the gossip of headers among the nodes in the P2P network by using [libp2p][libp2p] and its [pubsub][pubsub] modules. The pubsub topic is used for gossip (`/<networkID>/header-sub/v0.0.1`) and is configurable based on the `networkID` parameter used to initialize the subscriber service.
```

 // Registered func screens incoming headers
 // before they are forwarded to Subscriptions.
 // Only one func can be set.
 SetVerifier(func(context.Context, H) error) error
}
```

The `Subscribe()` method allows listening to any new headers that are published to the p2p network. The `SetVerifier()` method allows for setting a custom verifier that will be executed upon receiving any new headers from the p2p network. This is a very useful customization for the consumers of go-header library to pass any custom logic as part of the pubsub.

## Exchange

An exchange is a combination of:

* Exchange: a client for requesting headers from the p2p network (outbound)
* ExchangeServer: a p2p server for handling inbound header requests

### Exchange Client

Exchange defines a client for requesting headers from the p2p network. An exchange client is initialized using self [host.Host][host], a list of peers in the form of slice [peer.IDSlice][peer], and a [connection gater][gater] for blocking and allowing nodes. Optional parameters like `ChainID` and `NetworkID` can also be passed. The exchange client also maintains a list of trusted peers via a peer tracker.

> #### Peer Tracker

Reviewer 2: I think it's worth adding that PeerTracker discovers peers until `len(connected)+len(disconnected)` will not reach the limit(for now it is 100)

The three main functionalities of the peer tracker are:
* bootstrap
* track

> * gc

Reviewer: you should always define the acronym the first time you use it. 
```suggestion
* garbage collection (gc)
```

 // from another peer.
 RangeRequestTimeout time.Duration
 // networkID is a network that will be used to create a protocol.ID
 // Is empty by default
 networkID string
}
```

The default values for `ServerParameters` are as described below.

```
// DefaultServerParameters returns the default params to configure the store.
func DefaultServerParameters() ServerParameters {
 return ServerParameters{
  WriteDeadline:       time.Second * 8,
  ReadDeadline:        time.Minute,
  RangeRequestTimeout: time.Second * 10,
 }
}
```

During the server start, a request handler for the `protocolID` (`/networkID/header-ex/v0.0.3`) which defined using the `networkID` configurable parameter is setup to serve the inbound header requests.

The request handler returns a response which contains bytes of the requested header(s) and a status code as shown below.

```
message HeaderResponse {
  bytes body = 1;
  StatusCode statusCode = 2;
}
```

The `OK` status code for success, `NOT_FOUND` for requested headers not found, and `INVALID` for error (default).

```
enum StatusCode {
  INVALID = 0;
  OK = 1;
  NOT_FOUND = 2;
}
```

> The request handler utilizes its local [store](../specs/src/specs/store.md) for serving the header requests and only up to `MaxRangeRequestSize` of 512 headers can be requested while requesting headers by range. If the requested range is not available, the range is reset to whatever is available.

Reviewer: we should use an absolute link here. a relative link to a symlink might be buggy with the rendering.

# P2P

The P2P package mainly contains two services:

1) Subscriber
2) Exchange

> 

Author: exchange includes both client and server as described in the details.

## Exchange

An exchange is a combination of:

* Exchange: a client for requesting headers from the P2P network (outbound)
* ExchangeServer: a P2P server for handling inbound header requests

### Exchange Client

Exchange defines a client for requesting headers from the P2P network. An exchange client is initialized using self [host.Host][host], a list of peers in the form of slice [peer.IDSlice][peer], and a [connection gater][gater] for blocking and allowing nodes. Optional parameters like `ChainID` and `NetworkID` can also be passed. The exchange client also maintains a list of trusted peers via a peer tracker. The peer tracker discovers peers until `len(connected)+len(disconnected)` will not reach the limit(`maxPeerTrackerSize` for now it is 100) and `len(connected)>len(disconnected)`.

#### Peer Tracker

The three main functionalities of the peer tracker are:

* bootstrap
* track
* garbage collection (gc)

When the exchange client is started, it bootstraps the peer tracker using the set of trusted peers used to initialize the exchange client.

The new peers are tracked by subscribing to `event.EvtPeerConnectednessChanged{}`.

> The peer tracker also runs garbage collector (gc) that removes the disconnected peers (determined as disconnected for more than `maxAwaitingTime` or connected peers whose scores are less than or equal to `defaultScore`) from the tracked peers list once every `gcPeriod`.

Reviewer 3: This comment applies to all other constants throughout the spec

The peer tracker also provides a block peer functionality which is used to block peers that send invalid network headers. Invalid header is a header that fails when `Verify` method of the header interface is invoked.

The exchange client implements the following interface:

```
// Getter contains the behavior necessary for a component to retrieve
// headers that have been processed during header sync.
type Getter[H Header[H]] interface {
 Head[H]

 // Get returns the Header corresponding to the given hash.
 Get(context.Context, Hash) (H, error)

 // GetByHeight returns the Header corresponding to the given block height.
 GetByHeight(context.Context, uint64) (H, error)

 // GetRangeByHeight returns the given range of Headers.
 GetRangeByHeight(ctx context.Context, from, amount uint64) ([]H, error)

 // GetVerifiedRange requests the header range from the provided Header and
 // verifies that the returned headers are adjacent to each other.

>  GetVerifiedRange(ctx context.Context, from H, amount uint64) ([]H, error)

Reviewer 3: These methods were recently unified, and this needs to be updated.

}

// Head contains the behavior necessary for a component to retrieve
// the chain head. Note that "chain head" is subjective to the component
// reporting it.
type Head[H Header[H]] interface {
 // Head returns the latest known header.
 Head(context.Context, ...HeadOption[H]) (H, error)
}
```

> `Head()` method requests the latest header from trusted peers. The `Head()` requests utilizes 90% of the set deadline (in the form of context deadline) for requests and remaining for determining the best head from gathered responses. The `Head()` call also allows passing an optional `TrustedHead` which allows the caller to specify a trusted header against which the untrusted headers received from a list of tracked peers (limited to `maxUntrustedHeadRequests` of 4) can be verified against, in the absence of trusted peers. Upon receiving headers from peers (either trusted or tracked), the best head is determined as the head:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`Head()` method requests the latest header from trusted or tracked peers. The `Head()` call also allows passing an optional `TrustedHead`, which allows the caller to specify a trusted head against which the untrusted head is verified. By default, `Head()` requests only trusted peers and if `TrustedHead` is provided untrusted tracked peers are also requested (limited to `maxUntrustedHeadRequests` of 4). The `Head()` requests utilize 90% of the set deadline (in the form of context deadline) for requests and the remaining for determining the best head from gathered responses. Upon receiving headers from peers (either trusted or tracked), the best head is determined as the head:
```

* with max height among the received
* which is received from at least `minHeadResponses` of 2 peers
* when neither or both conditions meet, the head with highest height is used

Apart from requesting the latest header, any arbitrary header(s) can be requested (with 3 retries) using height (`GetByHeight`), hash (`Get`), range (`GetRangeByHeight` and `GetVerifiedRange`) from trusted peers as defined in the request proto message:

```
message HeaderRequest {
  oneof data {
    uint64 origin = 1;
    bytes hash = 2;
  }
  uint64 amount = 3;
}

> ```

Reviewer 3: [blocking]
Let's separate the protocol from implementation. I suggest adding `### Protocol` paragraph, which contains all the messages and explains the basic flow. The method description of components can then link to it.
